Add SHP 0035 Beta API changes (#105)
shipwright-io/community: ships/0035-beta-api-changes.md

<!--
Copyright The Shipwright Contributors

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-->

---
title: Shipwright BETA API Release
authors:
  - "@qu1queee"
reviewers:
  - "@SaschaSchwarze0"
  - "@coreydaley"
  - "@otaviof"
  - "@dalbar"
  - "@adambkaplan"
approvers:
  - "@SaschaSchwarze0"
  - "@adambkaplan"
creation-date: 2022-07-09
last-updated: 2022-07-09
status: implementable
---

# Shipwright BETA API Release

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [x] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [docs](/docs/)

## Open Questions [optional]

## Summary

Propose a path to release Shipwright Beta API. Achieving a Beta API will provide users a more stable version they can depend on, with the certainty of not dropping features. In this document we provide the modifications, deprecations or additions to the Beta API.

## Motivation

1. The majority of the Shipwright Alpha API did not change over time. Part of the current Alpha API is considered mature enough for graduating to Beta.

> 2. The Shipwright API got many novel ideas over time, supporting different use cases. These features were implemented as part of the Alpha API, but the desired state was not reach. Planning for Beta API puts into triage these features and their potential deprecation.

Author: added.

3. The Shipwright API was created with some assumptions in mind, over time new features force us to rethink on better states of the API.

### Goals

1. Layout the changes for Beta API.

2. Document the deprecation policy for Beta API.

3. Define supported use cases for Beta API.

### Non-Goals

1. Document migration strategies of API conventions or object definitions from Alpha to Beta.

## Proposal

We follow the Kubernetes API [versioning](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning). As documented by Kubernetes, we stick to the same levels (_Alpha, Beta or Stable_), depending on the levels of stability and support.

### Deprecation Policy

> For the policy of Beta, we rely also on the Kubernetes Deprecation [policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/), which translates to the following four rules:
> 
> 1. _API elements may only be removed by incrementing the version of the API group._
> 2. _API objects must be able to round-trip between API versions in a given release without information loss, with the exception of whole REST resources that do not exist in some versions._
> 3. _An API version in a given track may not be deprecated in favor of a less stable API version._
> 4. _Minimum API lifetime is determined by the API stability level_
> 
> Related to 4), in this document we propose that for Beta API versions, we provide coverage after deprecation for **9** months. We do not encourage to be based on releases quantity, per the faster cadence we have compared to Kubernetes.

Reviewer: This to me is a bit unclear - after reading the deprecation policy doc, I think we can make this a bit more succinct. Hopefully I am capturing your intent here:

```suggestion
In the spirit of the Kubernetes Deprecation [policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/), the beta API will come with the following support guarantees:

1. No breaking changes, such as removal of fields, will be introduced without introducing a new beta API version (ex - `v1beta2`).
2. Beta API versions may be deprecated, however they will continue to be served and supported for a period of 9 months after the deprecation is announced.
3. The beta API will never be deprecated in favor of an `alpha` API (ex - `v1alpha2`).
```

Reviewer: Upstream guidance also suggests that we don't have to create a converting webhook and keep serving alpha APIs. I think we as a community won't do that because we don't want the current user base to lift and shift their Shipwright data to new clusters. I think we can shorten the support duration of the alpha APIs to less than 9 months - perhaps 2-3 releases?

Author: Thanks, this is more digestible, I implemented the changes. I kept the 9 months, we can shorten it. 2-3 releases sound ideal, as long as we have a good understanding of our current cadence :)

4. In the `BuildStrategy` resource(_namespace and cluster scope_), replace the `.spec.buildSteps[]`items with customize fields, instead of the whole `corev1.Container` Go type.
5. In the `Build` resource, replace the `build.build.dev/build-run-deletion` annotation in favor of `.spec.retention.atBuildDeletion`.
6. In the `BuildRun` resource, rename `.status.latestTaskRunRef` to `.status.taskRunName`.
7. In the `BuildRun` resource, consolidate `.spec.buildRef.name` and `.spec.buildSpec` into `.spec.build.name` and `.spec.build.spec`.
8. Use `type discriminators` if an API object has some form of implied polymorphism. For example, source types or volume sources.

### Deprecation

1. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.sources`. We only allow `.spec.source`.
2. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.dockerfile`.
3. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.builder`.
4. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.volumes[].description`.
5. In the `Build`, `BuildStrategy` and `ClusterBuildStrategy` resource, remove the `status` subresource.
6. In the `BuildRun` resource, remove the support for auto-generating a service account.

### Supported Use Cases

> ### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Reviewer: Note here the implementation of the converting webhook.

Author: I will add all the technical changes we must do. Initially this was not intended to be here, but per the current time, this EP will contain what to change as well on how to achieve that.

### Deprecation Policy

In the spirit of the Kubernetes Deprecation [policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/), the beta API will come with the following support guarantees:

1. _No breaking changes, such as removal of fields, will be introduced without introducing a new beta API version (ex - `v1beta2`)._
2. _Beta API versions may be deprecated, however they will continue to be served and supported for a period of 9 months after the deprecation is announced._
3. _The beta API will never be deprecated in favor of an `alpha` API (ex - `v1alpha2`)._
4. _Minimum API lifetime is determined by the API stability level_

Related to 4), in this document we propose that for Beta API versions, we provide coverage after deprecation for **9** months. We do not encourage to be based on releases quantity, per the faster cadence we have compared to Kubernetes.

### API Changes

1. In all resources, introduce a convention for objects with an array, where each element contains the `name` key. An existing example is `.spec.volumes`.

> 2. In the `Build` resource, replace `.spec.source.credentials` and `.spec.output.credentials` with a single field(_key_). This will become `.spec.source.cloneSecret` and `.spec.output.pushSecret` and will reference a secret name in the current namespace.

Author: thanks, addressed, pls take a look

3. In the `BuildStrategy` resource(_namespace and cluster scope_), replace `.spec.buildSteps` in favor of `steps`. The same applies to the `BuildStep` Go type.
4. In the `BuildStrategy` resource(_namespace and cluster scope_), replace the `.spec.buildSteps[]`items with customize fields, instead of the whole `corev1.Container` Go type.

> 5. In the `Build` resource, replace the `build.build.dev/build-run-deletion` annotation in favor of `.spec.retention.atBuildDeletion`.

Author: The above link introduces `atBuildDeletion`, but also `keepOrphaned`. I found `atBuildDeletion` more appealing and easier to understand.

6. In the `BuildRun` resource, rename `.status.latestTaskRunRef` to `.status.taskRunName`.
7. In the `BuildRun` resource, consolidate `.spec.buildRef.name` and `.spec.buildSpec` into `.spec.build.name` and `.spec.build.spec`.
8. Use `type discriminators` if an API object has some form of implied polymorphism. For example, source types or volume sources.

### Deprecation

> 

Author: I added this, thanks.

1. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.sources`. We only allow `.spec.source`.
2. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.dockerfile`.
3. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.builder`.
4. In the `Build` resource, deprecate `.spec.volumes[].description`.
5. In the `Build`, `BuildStrategy` and `ClusterBuildStrategy` resource, remove the `status` subresource.
6. In the `BuildRun` resource, remove the support for auto-generating a service account.

### Supported Use Cases

#### Story 1

> As a user, I can create a Shipwright _v1beta1_ CRD. Shipwright should be able to convert this into a _v1alpha1_ CRD and stored that version in ETCD.

Reviewer 2: etcd is only one persistence option of Kubernetes, let's leave that out.

```suggestion
As a user, I can create a Shipwright _v1beta1_ custom resource. Shipwright should be able to convert this into a _v1alpha1_ custom resource and stored that version.
```

#### Story 2

> As an external Kubernetes controller, I should be able to operate on Shipwright _v1beta1_ or _v1alpha1_ CRD's, independently of the API stored version.

Reviewer 2: I think you here also mean custom resources and not their definition?

Author: correct. Fixed.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

We rely on the controller-runtime conversion model known as "hub and spoke". In this model, we will mark one version as the "hub", and all other versions just define conversion to and from the hub. In the scenario of needing to convert between two non-hub versions, we first convert to the hub version, and from there to the desired version:

![Controller-runtime hub and spoke model](assets/0006-hub-and-spoke-model.png)

> For requests to a particular version that is not the API stored version in ETCD, we will require a webhook. The webhook  will be call out by the API server to do the conversion. For the webhook, we will rely on the [webhook](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/webhook/conversion) package from controller-runtime. The [conversion](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/conversion) package will provide us the interface definitions that an API type must implement to be supported by the generic conversion webhook from controller-runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For requests to a particular version that is not the API stored version in ETCD, we will require a webhook. The webhook will be called by the API server to do the conversion. For the webhook, we will rely on the [webhook](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/webhook/conversion) package from controller-runtime. The [conversion](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/conversion) package will provide us the interface definitions that an API type must implement to be supported by the generic conversion webhook from controller-runtime.
```

From the above, the implementation can be categorize in two areas:

#### Webhook Implementation

> 1. We need to implement a webhook, following the [webhook](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/webhook/conversion) controller-runtime package. This webhook should assume that the related API types implement the conversion interface definitions.

Reviewer 2: I think we should decide in the proposal if we make the webhook a separate deployment, or serve it in the existing deployment. I guess we go with the first option also thinking forward to eventually contain admission webhook endpoints.

Author: Its also my preferred option, I'm making this clear in the above paragraph.

#### API types and conversion functions

1. Decide on the storage version. Here we propose to make _v1alpha1_ the storage version. This makes the _v1alpha1_ the "hub".
2. Add the _v1beta1_ API types, under [apis/build](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/tree/main/pkg/apis/build)
3. Introduce `<resource_name>_conversion.go` files next to the types, here we will define functions for conversion. This applies to all API versions.
4. For the hub, we will introduce under the `*_conversion.go` file a `Hub()` function. This will be done for the _v1alpha1_ API version.
5. For the spokes, we introduce under the `*_conversion.go` a `ConvertTo()` and `ConvertFrom()` function. This will be done for the _v1beta1_ API version.
6. Populate the conversion functions, to adhere to the API changes and deprecations mentioned above.
6. Modify the CRDs, to explicitly state which API version must be stored and which not.

> 7. Regenerate all artifacts, from generated code to CRDS based on the new API types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Regenerate all artifacts, from generated code to CRDs based on the new API types.
```
